.\" =======================================================================
.\" See mdoc(7) for the markup language used in this man page. It's grumpy,
.\" as we all know, but it's the best language for writing man pages after
.\" all. Yes we did try using pandoc to convert Markdown to man(7) but the
.\" result wasn't very satisfactory.
.\" =======================================================================
.Dd January 4, 2025
.Dt CABAL2PKG 8
.Os
.\" =======================================================================
.Sh NAME
.Nm cabal2pkg
.Nd automate importing/updating Haskell packages in pkgsrc
.\" =======================================================================
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op option Ns ...
.Cm init
.Op Fl w Ns | Ns Fl \-overwrite
.Ar PACKAGE-URI
.Nm
.Op option Ns ...
.Cm update
.Op Fl f Ns | Ns Fl \-force
.Op Fl m Ar STYLE Ns | Ns Fl \-merge Ns = Ns Ar STYLE
.Op Ar PACKAGE-URI
.\" =======================================================================
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a tool to automate importing Haskell packages to pkgsrc and updating
existing Haskell packages in pkgsrc.
.Nm
is similar to
.Xr url2pkg 8 ,
in that it downloads a distfile, extracts it, and generates package
.Pa Makefile
and other files, but it is specialised in Haskell packages and is intended
to generate mostly complete
.Pa Makefile .
.Pp
.Nm
can also update existing packages by performing 3-way merge on files.  In
the update mode,
.Nm
fetches two package metadata of the current and the updated version, then
tries to apply differences between two versions against the current set of
files.
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------------
.Ss Global options
The following options are available for all subcommands:
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Fl \-color Ns = Ns Ar WHEN , Fl \-colour Ns = Ns Ar WHEN
Use colours on output.
.Ar WHEN
can be
.Ql never ,
.Ql always ,
or
.Ql auto ,
where
.Ql auto
enables colours if and only if the standard error is a terminal (default:
.Ql auto ) .
.Pp
The environment variable
.Ev NO_COLOR
affects the default style of output.  See
.Sx ENVIRONMENT
for details.
.It Fl n , Fl \-no-commit\-msg
Suppress creating a file named
.Pa COMMIT_MSG
in the package directory; (hopefully) suitable for committing changes to
VCS.
.Nm
.Em never
makes commits automatically for you.  It is your responsibility to check if
things are good to commit.
.It Fl d , Fl \-debug
Show debugging output that is only useful for debugging
.Nm .
.It Fl p Ar DIR , Fl \-pkgdir Ns = Ns Ar DIR
The path to the pkgsrc package directory to work with (default:
.Ql \&. ,
i.e. the current directory).
.It Fl f Ar FLAG , Fl \-flag Ns = Ns Ar FLAG
Cabal package flags to apply, such as
.Ql +foo -bar .
This option can be arbitrarily repeated.  Using this option causes
.Dv CONFIGURE_ARGS
to appear in
.Pa Makefile .
For example,
.Bd -literal -offset indent
% cabal2pkg init foo-1.0 -f '+bar'
.Ed
.Pp
Running the command above in a pkgsrc directory
.Pa devel/hs-foo
downloads a Haskell package
.Ql foo-1.0
from Hackage and initialises the current directory with pkgsrc package
files, whose
.Pa Makefile
containing the following line:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
CONFIGURE_ARGS+=	-f +bar
.Ed
.Pp
Applying package flags affects conditionals in
.Pa .cabal
files.  Haskell packages can have optional dependencies that can be toggled
with package flags.  Consider the following snippet of a package
description:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
flag lua
    description: Include support for scripting with Lua.
    manual: True
    default: False

executable foo
    build-depends: aeson ^>= 2.2.1,
                   base   == 4.*
    if flag(foo)
        build-depends: lua ^>= 2.3.2
.Ed
.Pp
This package builds and installs an executable named
.Ql foo
which only depends on packages
.Ql aeson
and
.Ql base ,
but when a flag
.Ql lua
is enabled it additionally depends on package
.Ql lua .
Without enabling this flag,
.Nm
would produce a
.Pa Makefile
like this:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# $NetBSD$

DISTNAME=	foo-1.0
CATEGORIES=	devel

# MAINTAINER, COMMENT, LICENSE, ...

\&.include "../../converters/hs-aeson/buildlink3.mk"
\&.include "../../mk/haskell.mk"
\&.include "../../mk/bsd.pkg.mk"
.Ed
.Pp
However, when the flag is enabled it instead produces something like this:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# $NetBSD$

DISTNAME=	foo-1.0
CATEGORIES=	devel

# MAINTAINER, COMMENT, LICENSE, ...

CONFIGURE_ARGS+=	-f +lua

\&.include "../../converters/hs-aeson/buildlink3.mk"
\&.include "../../lang/hs-lua/buildlink3.mk"
\&.include "../../mk/haskell.mk"
\&.include "../../mk/bsd.pkg.mk"
.Ed
.It Fl \-fill-column Ns = Ns Ar COLUMN
Column beyond which line-wrapping should happen. Only used for
.Pa DESCR
files at the time of writing this manual page.
.It Fl \-ghc Ns = Ns Ar FILE
The path to GHC executable.  This is mostly used for locating the
Haskell package directory.  Its default value is determined at the
build time.
.It Fl \-make Ns = Ns Ar FILE
The path to BSD
.Xr make 1
command.  Its default value is determined at the build time, and the
environment variable
.Ev MAKE
affects it.  See
.Sx ENVIRONMENT
for details.
.It Fl h , Fl \-help
Display a help message.
.It Fl \-version
Display the version of
.Nm .
.El
.\" -----------------------------------------------------------------------
.Ss Subcommands
.Bl -tag -width Cm
.It Cm init
The
.Cm init
subcommand initialises the current directory (or whatever directory
specified with
.Fl p )
with a newly created pkgsrc package.  This subcommand takes a single
positional argument
.Ar PACKAGE-URI
specifying which Haskell package to import.  It can be one of the
following:
.Bl -dash
.It
.Li http://
or
.Li https://
URL of a package tarball.  This is a preferred way of importing packages
that are not registered to Hackage.
.It
.Li file://
URL of a package tarball on the local filesystem.  This is mostly for
debugging purpose and is generally unrecommended to use, because
.Pa Makefile
generated from a local tarball will not have
.Dv MASTER_SITES .
.It
The name of a package to retrieve from Hackage, in the form of
.Ar NAME
or
.Ar NAME Ns \- Ns Ar VERSION
(e.g.\&
.Li foo-0.1.2 ) .
If the version is omitted, the latest available (and non-deprecated) one
will be chosen.
.El
.Pp
The
.Cm init
subcommand can additionally take the following options:
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Fl w , Fl \-overwrite
Allow the command to overwrite existing files.  Without this option it
refuses to overwrite files, regardless of whether they have been modified
after being generated.
.El
.It Cm update
The
.Cm update
subcommand updates an existing package by merging differences between the
current version and a newer one.  Since this is a 3-way merge, changes may
conflict.  When that happens conflict markers will be left on files and you
will have to resolve them.
.Pp
This subcommand optionally takes a single positional argument
.Ar PACKAGE-URI
specifying which Haskell package to update to.  Its syntax is almost the
same as that of the
.Cm init
subcommand, but there is a single difference: a package to retrieve from
Hackage needs to be specified with only a
.Ar VERSION
but not with a
.Ar NAME .
When this argument is omitted, the
.Cm update
subcommand attempts to retrieve the latest available (and non-deprecated)
version from Hackage.
.Pp
The
.Cm update
subcommand can additionally take the following options:
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Fl f , Fl \-force
Perform the update forcefully.  Without this option the
.Cm update
subcommand refuses to update the package if any of the following conditions
are met, and this option overrides the refusal:
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
The given new version is actually older than the current one.
.It
The given new version has been marked as deprecated on Hackage.  This
usually means that version has known defects and the upstream thinks it
shouldn't be used.
.It
You are updating a package with a local tarball, which makes it lose
its
.Dv MASTER_SITES .
.El
.It Fl m Ar STYLE , Fl \-merge Ns = Ns Ar STYLE
Choose the style of conflict markers.
.Ar STYLE
can either be
.Ql rcs
(RCS
.Xr merge 1 )
or
.Ql diff3
(GNU
.Xr diff3 1 )
(default:
.Ql rcs ) .
.El
.El
.\" =======================================================================
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables affect the behaviour of
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width Ev
.It Ev MAKE
The name of, or the path to BSD
.Xr make 1
command to use.  If it's not defined
.Ql bmake
or
.Ql make
will be searched in the environment variable
.Ev PATH ,
with the former being preferred.  This variable only takes effect during
the build time of
.Nm .
.It Ev NO_COLOR
.Nm
adopts the
.Lk https://no-color.org/ NO_COLOR standard .
When the variable is set to a non-empty string (regardless of the value),
coloured output gets disabled by default.  The
.Fl \-colour
option can still override it.
.It Ev PKGMAINTAINER , Ev REPLYTO
The default value of
.Dv MAINTAINER
in
.Pa Makefile ,
with the former being preferred.  Only used by the subcommand
.Cm init .
.Cm update
inherits whatever set in the current
.Pa Makefile .
.El
.\" =======================================================================
.Sh FILES
.Nm
creates or updates the following files in a package directory:
.\" "-width Pa" is too wide. Let's just use the widest file path in this
.\" list.
.Bl -tag -width "buildlink3.mk"
.It Pa COMMIT_MSG
This file is created (or overwritten) when the option
.Fl n
is
.Em not
given.  On
.Cm init
it contains the generated contents of
.Pa DESCR .
On
.Cm update
it is generated by taking a difference of old and new
.Pa ChangeLog
of the package in the hope of discovering updates.  Usually this is a good
guess but it isn't guaranteed to be correct.  ChangeLogs are typically
marked up with Markdown but no attempts are made to interpret it.
.It Pa DESCR
This file is generated from the
.Dv description
field of a
.Pa .cabal
file.  Haddock markup is interpreted and rendered as a plain text.
.It Pa Makefile
This file is generated mainly from a
.Pa .cabal
file but the pkgsrc tree and the Haskell package database are also
consulted during its generation.
.Pp
.Nm
can handle conditional dependencies too; packages that require different
set of dependencies for each platform are represented with
.Pa Makefile
conditionals.
.It Pa PLIST
On
.Cm init
this file is created merely as a stub because the only way to generate it
properly is to actually build the package, and
.Nm
does not do that.  On
.Cm update
it is left unchanged.
.It Pa buildlink3.mk
This file is generated from the same data source as that of
.Pa Makefile
but only when the package provides libraries.  In other words this file
will not be generated if the package only provides executables.
.It Pa distinfo
This file is generated or updated by running
.Ql make distinfo
but on
.Cm update
it will be left unchanged when the updated
.Pa Makefile
contains conflict markers, because running
.Ql make
will certainly fail in that case.
.El
.\" =======================================================================
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Ss Importing a package from Hackage
.Bd -literal -offset indent
% cd /usr/pkgsrc
% mkdir devel/hs-foo
% cd devel/hs-foo
% cabal2pkg init foo-1.0
.Ed
.Ss Importing a package from a random site
.Bd -literal -offset indent
% cd /usr/pkgsrc
% mkdir devel/hs-foo
% cd devel/hs-foo
% cabal2pkg init https://example.com/foo-1.0.tar.gz
.Ed
.Ss Updating a package from Hackage to the latest version
.Bd -literal -offset indent
% cd /usr/pkgsrc
% cd devel/hs-foo
% cabal2pkg update
.Ed
.Ss Updating a package from a random site
.Bd -literal -offset indent
% cd /usr/pkgsrc
% cd devel/hs-foo
% cabal2pkg update https://example.com/foo-2.0.tar.gz
.Ed
.\" =======================================================================
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Nm
exits with 0 on success, and >0 if an error occurs.
.\" =======================================================================
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkgsrc 7 ,
.Xr url2pkg 8
.\" =======================================================================
.Sh AUTHORS
.An "PHO" Aq Mt pho@NetBSD.org
initially created the tool and wrote this manual page.
.\" =======================================================================
.Sh BUGS
Bugs and feature requests of
.Nm
is tracked at
.Lk https://github.com/depressed-pho/cabal2pkg/issues
.\" =======================================================================
